.\" Macros from groff an-ext.tmac file for portability
.de TQ
.  ns
.  TP \\$1\" no doublequotes around argument!
..
.de UR
.  ds m1 \\$1\"
.  nh
.  if \\n(mH \{\
.    do ev URL-div
.    do di URL-div
.  \}
..
.de UE
.  ie \\n(mH \{\
.    br
.    di
.    ev
.
.    ie \\n(dn \{\
.      do HTML-NS "<a href=""\\*(m1"">"
.      do chop URL-div
.      do URL-div
\c
.      do HTML-NS </a>
.    \}
.    el \
.      do HTML-NS "<a href=""\\*(m1"">\\*(m1</a>"
\&\\$*\"
.  \}
.  el \
\\*(la\\*(m1\\*(ra\\$*\"
.
.  hy \\n(HY
..
.de EX
.  do ds mF \\n[.fam]
.  nr mE \\n(.f
.  nf
.  nh
.  do fam C
.  ft CW
..
.de EE
.  do fam \\*(mF
.  ft \\n(mE
.  fi
.  hy \\n(HY
..
.
.
.TH XSUSPENDER 1 2017-12-13
.SH NAME
xsuspender \- auto-suspend inactive X11 applications
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP
.B xsuspender
.SH DESCRIPTION
Modern desktop GUI applications may use up significant system resources,
such as CPU time, just while idly running and even when unused.
Respecting expressive configuration, XSuspender moderates such
applications to suspend all activity shortly after their windows are unfocused.
by sending them Unix signal
.B SIGSTOP
(or executing a custom script; see
.B exec_suspend
key in section
.B CONFIGURATION
below).
When the application window regains focus, XSuspender sends it signal
.B SIGCONT\fR,
and it resumes execution exactly where it had left off.
.PP
This may result in significant reduction in CPU use which
prolongs battery run-time (5\-500%; subject to user's computing habits),
reduces CPU fan noise, and
prevents resource-hogging applications from plotting stuff
behind your back at least when you are not actively using them.
.PP
The method also has its share of drawbacks. See section
.B BUGS
below.
.SH OPTIONS
The program is mainly run without arguments.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print short help and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B G_MESSAGES_DEBUG
Set
.B G_MESSAGES_DEBUG\fR=\fIall\fR
to have the program report debug messages of its activity
to standard error.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
If set, the directory where
.I xsuspender.conf
configuration file can be found.
If missing, this location defaults to \fI~/.config\fR.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/xsuspender.conf
Configuration file read by the program.
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xsuspender.conf
Alternative configuration file when the variable is set.
.TP
.I share/xsuspender/xsuspender.conf.example
Example configuration file shipped with the program.
.TP
.I etc/xdg/autostart/xsuspender.desktop
A desktop session auto-start launcher.
Disabled by default.
To enable, copy it into
.I .config/autostart
directory (or
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/autostart
where applicable) and edit it, setting \fIHidden=false\fR.
Alternatively, you may be able to enable it via the
session application auto-start manager.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration key\-value file is in INI format. Notice:
.RS 2
.IP \[bu] 2
file must be encoded in UTF-8,
.IP \[bu] 2
comments follow '#' character,
.IP \[bu] 2
section and key names are case-sensitive.
.RE
.PP
The file should contain a
.B [Default]
section which all other sections inherit and override on per-key basis.
.PP
Each non-\fB[Default]\fR section constitutes a rule that
XSuspender will try to match and follow.
Sections can define the the following keys (listed with built-in
default values):
.TP
.B match_wm_name_contains
.TQ
.B match_wm_class_contains
.TQ
.B match_wm_class_group_contains
These keys order xsuspender to apply the rule only to windows
that contain the value string verbatim in their
.I WM_NAME
and
.I WM_CLASS
window manager hints.
When multiple matching keys are specified, their
logical conjunction (intersection) applies.
To find applicable values, run:
.IP
.in +4
.nf
xprop -notype WM_NAME WM_CLASS
.fi
.in
.IP
and click on the window of interest. Class group is the
second string in the
.I WM_CLASS
atom.
.TP
.BR suspend_delay \ =\ 10
Integer seconds to wait after the window loses focus
before it is suspended.
Setting a reasonable value avoids suspending processes too early during
rapid task switching.
If you set this value too low, upon process termination,
the process may stall in its termination routine if it hasn't
been able to finish in time.
Since we're unable to detect this, best give your processes ample time.
.TP
.BR resume_every \ =\ 50
Resume the suspended process every this many integer seconds
to have it do (some of) its backlog of work.
.TP
.BR resume_for \ =\ 5
Resume suspended process only for this long before suspending it again.
.TP
.BR only_on_battery \ =\ true
Apply the rule only when on battery power. You may wish to set this to
\fIfalse\fR for hopelessly annoying processes such as virtual machines
running Windos.
.TP
.BR auto_suspend_on_battery \ =\ true
If true, automatically apply this rule when on batter power, even if
the matching window didn't just lose focus.
.TP
.BR suspend_subtree_pattern
Extended regular expression.
If provided, when XSuspender suspends a process, it will also suspend
all its descendant processes (children, grandchildren etc.) whose
command line string matches the pattern.
Set to \fI.\fR to match and kill all descendants.
This setting only applies when
.B send_signals
is also true.
.TP
.BR exec_suspend
.TQ
.BR exec_resume
Before suspending / resuming the process,
execute the string as a command line shell script.
If the script execution is successful (exit status 0), proceed
with process suspension, otherwise abort it.
(Process resumption is never aborted.)
.IP
The executed script gets passed via the environment the following
variables:
.I PID
(process id),
.I XID
(X11 window id of the triggering window), and
.I WM_NAME
(window title).
.IP
You can use these keys to control suspension of your processes
or disjoint components thereof
in a custom way. In this case, you may also find
.B send_signals
key to be of use.
.TP
.BR send_signals \ =\ true
If true, XSuspender kills the matching process with
SIGSTOP / SIGCONT Unix signals.
If false, XSuspender sends no signals of its own, deferring to
your
.B exec_suspend
and
.B exec_resume
scripts to do the work.
.TP
.BR downclock_on_battery \ =\ 0
Set to greater than zero to decrease the CPU time allotted to the matching
process when running on battery power.
For every one time slice running, the process sleeps for this many slices.
Thus, a value
.I 1
decreases the CPU consumption of the process by 50%,
a value of
.I 2
by 66%, a value of
.I N
by \fIN/(N+1)\fR%, and so on. A value of
.I 0
disables downclocking.
.IP
This is a separate, stand-alone mechanism that limits consumption of,
also and in particular, focused windows.
.SH BUGS
The following limitations and quirks are known:
.IP \[bu] 2
Don't configure XSuspender for software you want to keep continuously alive
in the background, such as music players and daemons.
If you suspend IM clients, wake them up frequently (configuration key
.B resume_every\fR)
so they can process their queued network events.
If you like to stream music from YouTube or similar, you might
want to exempt your browser from suspension,
or consider using a lighter-weight native client, such as Musictube.
.IP \[bu] 2
Windows that minimize to system tray, such as torrent and IM clients,
need to be resumed frequently to respond to tray icon click events
in a seamless manner.
.IP \[bu] 2
Pasting from clipboard is prevented while the selection source process
is suspended.
Mitigate by using a clipboard manager that takes ownership of
the selection.
.IP \[bu] 2
Suspended windows might not redraw until regaining focus.
If something covers them, expect visual artifacts.
.IP \[bu] 2
Mouse-wheel scrolling might not work in suspended windows.
They require keyboard input focus to resume.
.IP \[bu] 2
Processes that take a long time to shut down after their window already
disappears may be stopped in the middle of their termination routines.
Avoid with reasonably generous `suspend_delay`.
.IP \[bu] 2
XSuspender won't work in remote X sessions.
.IP \[bu] 2
XSuspender won't work with Wayland.
.PP
Please raise any further bugs and ideas on the project's
.UR https://github.com/kernc/xsuspender/issues
GitHub issue tracker
.UE .
.SH EXAMPLE
Example configuration section for VirtualBox:
.PP
.in +4
.EX
# This is a comment.

[Default]
suspend_delay = 10
resume_every = 50
resume_for = 5
only_on_battery = true
auto_suspend_on_battery = true
send_signals = true

# Rule name is an alphanumeric string.
# Rule VirtualBox inherits from Default rule

[VirtualBox]
match_wm_class_contains = VirtualBox

# VirtualBox suspension is managed by VBoxManage utility.
send_signals = false

# We get the VM UUID via its process command line.
# NOTE: Unlike in this example, the whole script should be
# on a single line.
exec_suspend = VBoxManage controlvm "$(ps -o args= -q $PID | \\
               sed -E 's/.*--startvm ([a-f0-9-]+).*/\\1/')" pause
exec_resume  = VBoxManage controlvm "$(ps -o args= -q $PID | \\
               sed -E 's/.*--startvm ([a-f0-9-]+).*/\\1/')" resume
.EE
.in
.PP
Find further examples in example configuration file
accompanying this distribution
(see section
.B FILES
above).
.PP
To debug your configuration rules, run:
.PP
.in +4
.nf
G_MESSAGES_DEBUG=all xsuspender
.fi
.in
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR kill (1),
.BR xprop (1),
.BR regex (7),
.BR signal (7)
